x

Whoever handles this instruction can be concerned solely with effectiveness.

This instrument belongs to the technological universe, shares its characteristics, and is indissolubly linked to it.

A second source of confusion is the general conviction, derived from past experience, that propaganda consists mainly of ”tall stories”, disseminated by means of lies.

Even when these obstacles have been removed it is still very difficult to determine what constitutes propaganda in our world and what the nature of propaganda is.

xi

We then came up against the extreme difficulty of definition. We can immediately discard such simplistic definitions as Marbury B. Ogle’s: “Propaganda is any effort to change opinions or attitudes… The propagandist is anyone who communicates his ideas with the intent of influencing his listener.” Such a definition would include the teacher, the priest, indeed any person conversing with another on any topic. Such a broad definition clearly does not help us to understand the specific character of propaganda.

xvii

Again I want to emphasise that the study of propaganda must be conducted within the context of the technological society.

The Characteristics of Propaganda
External characteristics

4

Propaganda is scientific in that it tends to establish a set of rules, rigorous, precise, and tested, that are not merely recipes but impose themselves on every propagandist, who is less and less free to follow his own impulses. He must apply, increasingly and exactly, certain precise formulas that can be applied by anybody with the proper training - clearly a characteristic of a technique based on science.

5

One last trait reveals the scientific character of modern propaganda: the increasing attempt to control its use, measure its results, define its effects. This is very difficult, but the propagandist is no longer content to have obtained, or to believe he has obtained, a certain result; he seeks precise evidence.

Stalinist propaganda was in great measure founded on Pavlov’s theory of the conditioned reflex. Hitlerian propaganda was in great measure founded on Freud’s theory of repression and libido American propaganda is founded in great measure on Dewey’s theory of teaching.

9

The most favourable moment to seize a man and influence him is when he is alone in the mass.

10

To draw the individual into the new of propaganda, each technique must be utilised in its own specific way, directed toward producing the effect it can best produce, and fused with all the other media, each of them reaching the individual in a specific fashion and making him react anew to the same theme - in the same direction, but differently.

Thus one leaves no part of the intellectual or emotional life alone; man is surrounded on all sides

Those who go to the movies three times a week are not the same people who read the newspapers with care.

11

It is a matter of reaching and encircling the whole man and all men.

Propaganda cannot be satisfied with partial successes, for it does not tolerate discussion; by its very nature, it excludes contradiction and discussion

12

The propagandist must combine the elements of propaganda as in a real orchestration.

13

One must utilise the education of the young to condition them to what comes later.

15

We must also distinguish between covert propaganda and overt propaganda.

16

Finally, we well know that the combination of covert propaganda and overt propaganda is increasingly conducted so that white propaganda actually becomes a cover and mask for black propaganda - that is, one openly admits the existence of one kind of propaganda and of its organization, means, and objectives, but all this is only a façade to capture the attention of individuals and neutralize their instinct to resist, while other individuals, behind the scenes, work on public opinion in a totally different direction, seeking to arouse very different reactions, utilizing even existing resistance to overt propaganda.

17

The individual must not be allowed to recover, to collect himself, to remain untouched by propaganda during any relatively long period, for propaganda is not the touch of the magic wand. It is based on slow, constant impregnation. It creates convictions and compliance through imperceptible influences that are effective only by continuous repetition.

25

Propaganda is very frequently described as a manipulation for the purpose of changing ideas or opinions, of making individuals “believe” some idea or fact, and finally of making them adhere to some doctrine - all matters of mind. Or, to put it differently, propaganda is described as dealing with beliefs or ideas.

The aim of modern propaganda is not longer to modify ideas, but to provoke action.

Simply to ask an individual if he believes this or that, or if he has this or that idea, gives absolutely no indication of what behavior he will adopt of what action he will take.

27

He must not know that he is being shaped by outside forces (this is one the conditions for the success of propaganda)

We are living in a time when systematically - though without our wanting it so - action and thought are being separated.

28

Modern psychologists are well aware that there is not necessarily any continuity between conviction and action and intrinsic rationality in opinions or acts. Into these gaps in continuity propaganda inserts its lever. It does not seek to create wise or reasonable men, but proselytes and militants.

29

The proselyte receives an overwhelming impulse that makes him at with the whole of his being. He is actually transformed into a religious man in the psycho-sociological sense of the term.

For action makes propaganda’s effect irreversible. He who acts in obedience to propaganda can never go back. He is now obliged to believe in that propaganda because of his past action.

30

Propaganda now masters him completely - and we must bear in mind that any propaganda that does not lead to this kind of participation is mere child’s play.

31

Propaganda tries first of all to create conditioned reflexes in the individual by training him so that certain words, signs, or symbols, even certain persons or facts, provoke unfailing reactions.

The propagandist tries to create myths by which man will live, which respond to his sense of the sacred. By “myth” we mean an all-encompassing, activating image: a sort of vision of desirable objectives that have lost their material, practical character and have become strongly coloured, over-whelming, all encompassing, and which displace from the conscious all that is not related to it.

The Characteristics of Propaganda
	Internal characteristics

33

What people think of Negroes, Jews, bourgeois, or colonialists will be only slightly altered by propaganda attempts.

34

Never make a direct attack on an established, reasoned, durable opinion or an accepted cliché.

36

Propaganda need only determine which opinions must not be attacked head on, and be content to undermine them gradually and to weaken them by cloaking them in ambiguity.

37

The group must need something, and the propaganda must respond to that need.

38

Hate, hunger, and pride make better levels of propaganda than do love or impartiality.

52

The most generally held concept of propaganda is that it is a series of tall stories, a tissue of lies, and that lies and necessary for effective propaganda. Hitler himself apparently confirmed this point of view when he said that the bigger the lie, the more its chance of being believed. This concept leads to two attitudes among the public. The first is: “Of course we shall not be victims of propaganda because we are capable of distinguishing truth from falsehood.” Anyone holding that conviction is extremely susceptible to propaganda, because when propaganda does tell the “truth,” he is then convinced that it is no longer propaganda.

53

The idea that propaganda consists of lies (which makes it harmless and even a little ridiculous in the eyes of the public) is still maintained by some specialists.

It seems that in propaganda we must make a radical distinction between a fact on the one hand and intentions or interpretations on the other.

55

A second qualification obviously concerned the presentation of facts.

Most of the time the fact is presented in such a fashion that the listener or reader cannot really understand it or draw any conclusions from it. For example, a figure may be given with reference to anything, without a correlation of a percentage or a ratio.

56

When it would be dangerous to let a fact be known, the modern propagandist prefers to hide it, to say nothing rather than to lie.

56 - 57

The public is left to draw obvious conclusions from a cleverly presented truth.

57

Intentions and Interpretations. This is the real realm of the lie; but it is exactly here that it cannot be detected.

But no proof can be furnished where motivations or intentions are concerned or interpretation of a fact is involved.

59

Propaganda must serve instead as a veil for such projects, masking true intentions.

One must not be too precise at the top level, or promise short-term reforms, for it would be risky to invite a comparison between what was promised and what was done. Such comparison would be possible if propaganda operated in the realm of future fact. Therefore, it should be confined to intentions, to the moral realm, to values, to generalities. And if some angry man were to point out the contradictions, in the end his argument would carry no weight with the public.

60

It is possible that when the United States makes it propaganda for freedom, it really thinks it is defending freedom; and that the Soviet Union, when presenting itself as the champion of democracy, really imagines itself to be a champion of democracy.

Categories of Propaganda

61

Propaganda feeds, develops, and spreads the system of false claims - lies aimed at the complete transformation of minds, judgments, values, and actions.

Propaganda is a set of methods employed by an organised group that wants to bring about the active or passive participation in its action of a mass of individuals, psychologically unified through psychological manipulations and incorporated in an organization.

62

First we must distinguish between political propaganda and sociological propaganda. We shall not dwell long on the former because it is the type called immediately to mind by the word propaganda itself.

62 - 63

We call this phenomenon “sociological” propaganda, to show, first of all, that the entire group, consciously or not, expresses itself in this fashion; and to indicate, secondly, that its influence aims much more at an entire style of life than at opinions or even one particular course of behavior.

63

Advertising as the spreading of a certain style of life can be said to be included in such propaganda.

65

Consequently, just as with ordinary propaganda, it is a matter of propagating behaviour and myths both good and bad.

There a whole society actually expresses itself through this propaganda by advertising its kind of life.

By doing that, a society engages in propaganda on the deepest level. Sociologists have recognised that, above all, propaganda must change a person’s environment. Krech and Crutchfield insist on this fact, and show that a simple modification of the psychological context can bring about changes of attitude without ever directly attacking particular attitudes or opinions.

66

Sociological propaganda must act gently. It conditions; it introduces a truth, an ethic in various benign forms, which although sporadic, end by creating a fully established personality structure.

(mention of NAM)

67

Sociological propaganda, involuntary at first, becomes more and more deliberate, and ends up by exercising influence. One example is the code drawn up by the Motion Picture Association, which requires films to promote “the highest types of social life“, “the proper conception of society”, “the proper standards of life,“ and to avoid “any ridicule of the law (natural or human) or sympathy for those who violate the law.“

He is perfectly adapted to his environment, like “a fish in water.” From that moment on, everything that expresses this particular way of life, that reinforces and improves it, is good; everything that tends to disturb, criticize, or destroy it is bad.

This leads people to believe that the civilization representing their way of life is best.

68

The solution was psychological standardization - that is, simply to use a way of life as the basis of unification and as an instrument or propaganda.

72

Propaganda of agitation thus unleashes an explosive movement; it operates inside a crisis or actually provokes the crisis itself.

Specialists in agitation propaganda break up the desired goals into a series of stages to be reached one by one.

73

Hate is generally its most profitable resource. It is extremely easy to launch a revolutionary movement based on hatred of a particular enemy. Hatred is probably the most spontaneous and common sentiment; it consists of attributing one’s misfortunes and sins to “another,” who must be killed in order to assure the disappearance of those misfortunes and sins.

74

Any statement whatever, no matter how stupid, any “tell tale” will be believed once it enters into the passionate current of hatred.

76

Let us note right away a final aspect of integration propaganda: the more comfortable, cultivated, and informed the milieu to which it is addressed, the better it works. Intellectuals are more sensitive than peasants to integration propaganda. In fact, they share the stereotypes of a society even when they are political opponents of the society.

84

In The Organization Man, William H. Whyte clearly shows the way in which the American school is becoming more and more a simple mechanism to adapt youngsters to American society.

87

A surfeit of data, far from permitting people to make judgments and form opinions, prevents them from doing so and actually paralyses them.

Thus the mechanisms of modern information induce a sort of hypnosis in the individual, who cannot get out of the field that has been laid out for him by the information.

The more the techniques of distributing information develop, the more the individual is shaped by such information.

89

Modern propaganda could not exist without the mass media - the inventions that proceed press, radio, television, and motion pictures, or those that produced the means of modern transportation and which permit crowds of diverse individuals from all over to assemble easily and frequently.

The findings of social psychology, depth psychology, behaviourism, group sociology, sociology of public opinion are the very foundations of the propagandist’s work.

Conditions for the Existence of Propaganda

90

When individuals are not held together by local structures, the only form in which they can live together is in an unstructured mass society.

91

From this perspective, individualist society and mass society are two corollary aspects of the same reality.

In individualist theory the individual has eminent value, man himself is the master of his life; in individualist reality each human being is subject to innumerable forces and influences, and is not at all the master of his own life.

91 - 92

Nineteenth-century individualist society came about through the disintegration of such small groups as the family or the church. Once these groups lost their importance, the individual was left substantially isolated. He was plunged into a new environment, generally urban, and thereby “uprooted”. He no longer had a traditional place in which to live; he was no longer geographically attached to a fixed place, or historically to his ancestry. An individual, thus uprooted can only be a part of a mass.

92

The individual is placed in a minority position and burdened at the same time with a total, crushing responsibility. Such conditions make an individualist society fertile group for modern propaganda. The permanent uncertainty, the social mobility, the absence of sociological protection and of traditional frames of reference - all these inevitably provide propaganda with a malleable environment that can be fed information from the outside and conditioned at will.

He obeyed only if his entire group obeyed. This does not mean he was freer, but only that he was determined by his local environment and by his restricted group and very little by broad ideological influences or collective psychic stimuli.

93

A mass society is a society with considerable population density in which local structures and organizations are weak, currents of opinion are strongly felt, men are grouped into large and influential collectives, the individual is part of these collectives, and certain psychological unity exists. Mass society,  moreover, is characterised by a certain uniformity of material life.

94

The individuals making up the mass in the grip of propaganda may seem quite diversified, but they have enough in common for propaganda to act on them directly.

Conversely, the very fact of belonging to crowds turns the individual more and more into mass man and thus modifies his very being.

From mass society emerge the psychological elements most favorable to propaganda: symbols and stereotypes.

We find the maximum deviation between public opinions and latent private opinions, which are either repressed or progressively eliminated.

96

The leader must be a sublimation of the “ordinary man.” He must not seem to be of a different quality. The ordinary man must not feel that the leader transcends him.

98

The family and the church, try at all costs to live by propaganda: families are protected by family associations; churches try to take over the methods of pscyhological influence.

And what is more, the new primary groups (such as political parties or unions) are important relay stations in the flow of total propaganda

99

We find in the ultra-rapid, forced, and systematic transformation of these societies a dramatic confirmation of our analysis showing that a certain “massification” of society is required for propaganda to be able to develop.

101

Therefore, public opinion always rests on problems that do not correspond to reality.

104

Let no one say: “This reader does not submit to propaganda; first he has such and such ideas and opinions, and then he buys the paper that corresponds to them.” Such an argument is simplistic, removed from reality, and based on liberal idealism. In reality, propaganda is at work here, for what is involved is a progression from vague, diffuse opinion on the part of the reader to rigorous, exciting , active expression that opinion. A feeling or an impression is transformed into a motive for action. Confused thoughts are crystallized. Myths and the reader’s conditioned reflexes are reinforced if he reads that paper. All this is characteristic of propaganda. The reader is really subject to propaganda, even though it be propaganda of his choice. Why always fall into the error of seeing in propaganda as nothing but a device to change opinions? Propaganda is also a means of reinforcing opinions, of transforming them into action.

117

Propaganda seizes what springs up spontaneously and gives it a new form, a structure, an effective channel, and can eventually transform ideology into a myth.

The Necessity for Propaganda

127

In fact the two realities - information and propaganda - are so little distinct from one another that what the enemy says is nothing but propaganda whereas what our side says in nothing but information.

129

For the average Westerner, the will of the people is sacred, and a government that fails to represent that will is an abominable dictatorship.

140

The majority prefers expressing stupidities to not expressing any opinion: this gives them the feeling of participation. For this they need simple, thoughts, elementary explanations, a “key” that will permit them to take position, and even ready-made opinions.

The more complex, general, and accelerated political and economic phenomena become, the more do individuals feel concerned, the more do they want to be involved. In a certain sense this is democracy’s gain, but it also leads to more propaganda.

Here one must also take into account the individual’s laziness, which plays a decisive role in the entire propaganda phenomenon, and the impossibility of transmitting all information fast enough to keep up with developments in the modern world. Besides, the developments are not merely beyond man’s intellectual scope; they are also beyond him in volume and intensity; he simply cannot grasp the world’s economic and political problems.

144 - 145

Certain major stories, such as Indochina and Hungary, become the subject of continuous reporting for several weeks or months, but that is not typical. Ordinarily, a follow-up story on a previous news item appears two weeks to a month later. To obtain a rounded picture, one would have to do research, but the average person has neither the desire not the time for it. As a result, he finds himself in a kind of kaleidoscope in which thousands of unconnected images follow each other rapidly. His attention is continually diverted to new matters, new centers of interest, and is dissipated on a thousand things, which disappear from one day to the next. The world becomes remarkably changeable and uncertain; he feels as though he is at the hub of a merry-go-round, and can find no fixed point of continuity; this is the first effect information has on him. Even with major events, an immense effort is required to get a proper broad view from the thousand little strokes, the variations of color, intensity, and dimension, which his paper gives him. The world thus looks like a pointillist canvas - a thousand details make a thousand points. Moreover, blank spots on the canvas also prevent a coherent view. Our reader then would have to be able to stand back and get a panoramic view from a distance; but the law of news is that is it a daily affair. Man can never stand back to get a broad view because he immediately receives a new batch of news, which supersedes the old and demands a new point of focus, for which our reader has no time.

As the most frequent news story is about an accident or a calamity, our reader takes a catastrophic view of the world around him.

146

Let us remember just two aspects of this: the need for explanations and the need for values, which both spring largely, though not entirely, from the promulgation of news. Effective propaganda need to give man an all-embracing view of the world, a view rather than a doctrine.

147

Propaganda must also furnish an explanation for all happenings, a key to understand the whys and the reasons for economic and political developments. News loses its frightening character when it offers information for which the listener already has a ready explanation in his mind, or for which he can easily find one.

Above all he is a victim of emptiness - he is a man devoid of meaning.

He is available, and ready to listen to propaganda. He is the lonely man (The Lonely Crowd) , and the larger the crowd in which he lives, the more isolated he is.

148

Propaganda is the true remedy for loneliness. It also corresponds to deep and constant needs, more developed today, perhaps, than ever before: the need to believe and obey, to create and hear fables, to communicate in the language of myths.

150

“Everything is in the clutches of evil. There is a way out. But only if everybody participates. You must participate. If you don’t, all will be lost, through your fault.” This is the feeling propaganda must generate.

151

We live in an increasingly organised and ordered society which permits less and less free and spontaneous expression of man’s profound drives (which, it must be admitted, would be largely anti-social if completely unleashed).

For despite present day “immorality,” of which people complain, contemporary man is much less free in these matters than was the man of the sixteenth and seventeenth century.

152

In the need for release we find some spontaneous expression; surely, jazz is a means, for many young people, of releasing pressed impulses, and so are violence displays (James Dean, black leather jackets, the bullion in Sweden in 1957, and so on.)

Propaganda points out enemies that must be slain, transforming crime into a praiseworthy act. Almost every man feels a desire to kill his neighbor, but this is forbidden, and in most cases the individual will refrain from it for fear of the consequences. But propaganda opens the door and allows him to kill the Jews, the bourgeois, the Communists and so on, and such murder ven becomes an achievement. Similarly, in the nineteenth century, when a man felt like cheating on his wife, or divorcing her, he found this was frowned on. So, at the end of that century a propaganda appeared that legitimised adultery and divorce. In such cases the individual attaches himself passionately to the source of such propaganda, which, for him, provides liberation.

159

One is always at the point of finishing the war.

Finally, propaganda also eliminates anxieties stemming from irrational and disproportionate fears, for it gives man assurances equivalent to those formerly given him by religion. It offers him a simple and clear explanation of the world in which he lives - to be sure, a false explanation far removed from reality, but one that is obvious and satisfying. It hands him a key with which he can open all doors; there is no more mystery; everything can be explained, thanks to propaganda.

160

Propaganda is the inevitable result of the various components of the technological society, and plays so central a role in the life of that society that no economic or political development can take place without the influence of its great power.

Psychological Effects of Propaganda

162

Prejudices that exist bout any event become greatly reinforced and hardened by propaganda; the individual is told that he is right in harboring them; he discovers reasons and justifications for a prejudice when it is clearly shared by many and proclaimed openly.

166

This crystallisation closes his mind to all new ideas. The individual now has a set of prejudices and beliefs, as well as objective justifications. His entire personality now revolves around those elements.

One might go further and say that propaganda tends to give a person a religious personality: his psychological life is organised around an irrational, external, and collective tenet that provides a scale of values, rules of behavior, and a principle of social integration.

170

The propagandee, if deprived of one propaganda, will immediately adopt another.

171

He no longer expresses himself, but his society, his group.

When he recites his propaganda lesson and says that he is thinking for himself, when his eyes see nothing and his mouth only produces sounds previously stencilled into his brain, when he says that he is indeed expressing this judgment - then he really demonstrates that he no longer thinks at all, ever, and that he does not exist as a person. When the propagandee tries to assert himself as a living reality, he demonstrates his total alienation most clearly; for he shows that he can no longer even distinguish between himself and society. He is then perfectly integrated, he is the social group, there is nothing in him not of the group, there is no opinion in him that is not the group’s opinion. He is nothing except what propaganda has taught him. He is merely a channel that ingests the truths or propaganda and dispenses them with the conviction that is the result of his absence as a person.

This mechanism of alienation generally corresponds either to projection into, and identification with, a hero and leader, or to a fashion with the mass.

175

Modern man deeply craves friendship, confidence, close personal relationships. But he is plunged into a world of competition, hostility, and anonymity. He needs to meet someone whom he can trust completely, for whom he can feel pure friendship, and to whom he can mean something in return. That is hard to find in his daily life, but apparently confidence in a leader, hero, a movie star, or a TV personality is much more satisfying. TV, for example, creates feelings of friendship, a new intimacy, and thus fully satisfies those needs. But such satisfactions are purely illusory and fallacious because there is no true friends of any kind between between the TV personality and the viewer who feels that personality to be his friend.

176

This campaign was designed to satisfy the needs of the Soviet masses, to regain their confidence and appease their demands. What we see here is a purely theoretical answer, but it satisfies because it is believed by the masses and thus made true and real by the mechanism of propaganda.

177

By creating class-consciousness in the proletariat, propaganda adds a corresponding tension to the worker’s misery.

179

We shall stress the dissociation between thought and action.

Thinking has become a superfluous exercise, without reference to reality; it is a purely internal, without compelling force, more or less a game.

In sum, thought and reflection have been rendered thoroughly pointless by the circumstances in which modern man lives and acts.

181

In connection with the problem of dissociation we must now examine the case of an individual subjected to two intense, opposing propagandas equally close to him. Such a situation can occur in democracy.

187

For we realize that propaganda can and does produce contradictory psychological results.

190

There is no greater enemy of Christianity or Communism than he who was once an absolute believer.

The Socio-Political Effects

193

A relationship between propaganda and ideology has always existed.

Society rests on certain beliefs and no social group can exist without such beliefs.

194

It has long been known that some ideologies are compatible with passive behavior, but most of them are active - i.e., they push men into action.

Propaganda appears - spontaneously or in an organised fashion - as a means of spreading an ideology beyond the borders of a group or of fortifying it within a group.

Propaganda organises itself in conformity with that ideology, so that in the course of history we find very different forms of propaganda, depending on what ideological content was to be promulgated.

195

Propaganda’s task is less and less to propagate ideologies; it now obeys its own laws and becomes autonomous.

The propagandist is not, and cannot be, a “believe.” Moreover, he cannot believe in the ideology he must use in his propaganda. He is merely a man at the service of a party, a State, or some other organization, and his task is to insure the efficiency of that organization.

197

More and more, the propagandist is a technician using a keyboard of material media and psychological techniques; and in the midst of all that, ideology is only one of the incidental and interchangeable cogs.

The organization served by propaganda is not basically interested in disseminating a doctrine, spreading an ideology, or creating an orthodoxy.

The point is not to ask oneself whether some economic or intellectual doctrine is valid, but only whether it can furnish effective catchwords capable of mobilising the masses here and now.

198

The propagandist must be careful not to run head-on into a prevailing ideology; all he can do is integrate it into his system, use some parts of it, deflect it, and so on. Second, he must ask himself whether the ideology, ushc as it is, can be used for his propaganda; whether it has psychologically predisposed an individual to submit to propaganda’s impulsions.

The fact that he reinforces a democratic belief in the public is of no importance: one now knows that such beliefs are no obstacle to the establishment of a dictatorship.

Public opinion is so uncertain and clear as to the content of its ideologies that it follows the one that says the magic words, not realising the contradictions between the proclamation of a catchword and the action that follows it.

199

And public opinion is used to reacting automatically to the expressions of a former accepted ideology: words such as Democracy, Country, and Social Justice can now set off the desired reflexes.

The propagandist limits himself to what is already present. From there he can use any ideological content at all, no matter where or when.

200

Socialist ideology was transformed into myth by Leninist propaganda, patriotic ideology became national myth, and the ideology of happiness was transformed into myth at the end of the nineteenth century. In this fashion, too, the myth of Progress as constructed from a group of propagandas based on bourgeois ideology.

201

Only the ignorant can still believe that ideas, doctrines, beliefs can make man act without the utilisation of psycho-sociological methods.

Torture (of political enemies) is implicitly accepted by public opinion, which expresses its dismay only in words, but not in action.

Christians are caught in a psycho-sociological mechanism that conditions them to certain practices, despite their attachment to other ideas.

Moreover, in this relationship between ideology and action, we emphasise that nowadays action creates ideology, not vice versa.

203

In a propagandised milieu, communications no longer take place in interpersonal patterns, but in patterns set by the propaganda organization.

The propagandee and the non-propagandee cannot discuss: no psychologically acceptable communication or exchange is possible between them.

Opinion can no longer form itself except via the centralized media of information. “No opinion is of any consequence unless it is first communicated to the masses by the vast media of dissemination and propaganda, and if it is not assimilated on a massive scale.” Here we are facing structural changes.

205

Details and nuances disappear. The more active the propaganda, the more monolithic and less individualized public opinion will be.

Nuances and gradations prevent public opinion from forming; the more complicated it is, the longer it takes to assume solid shape. But in the case of such diffusion, propaganda intervenes with a force of simplification. Attitudes are reduced to two: positive and negative.

207

Far from permitting private opinion to express itself these media exclusively serve “public” opinion, which is no longer fed by private opinion at all.

I have said on several occasions that propaganda aims less at modifying personal opinions than at leading people into action.

213

The anti-Communist will be constantly more convinced of the evilness of the Communist, and vice versa. As a result, people ignore each other more and more. They cease altogether to be open to an exchange of reason, arguments, points of view.

The more propaganda there is, the more partitioning there is. For propaganda suppresses conversation; the man opposite is no longer an interlocutor but an enemy.


214

We see before our eyes how a world of closed minds establishes itself, a world in which everybody talks to himself, everybody constantly reviews his own certainty about himself and the wrongs done him by the Others - a world in which nobody listens to anybody else, everybody talks and nobody listens. And the more one talks, the more one isolates oneself, because the more one accuses others and justifies oneself.

One must not think, incidentally, that such partitioning is in conflict with the formation of public opinion. Although propaganda partitions society, it affects opinion and transcends the groups in which it operates. In the first place, it maintains its effectiveness toward the mass of undecided who do not yet belong to a group. Then, too, it is possible to affect those who belong to a group of a different sort: for example, Communist propaganda that will not affect militant Socialists might affect Protestants; American propaganda that will not affect a Frenchman in his capacity as a Frenchman might influence him with regard to capitalism or the liberal system.

215

Obviously, this procedure further increases separation, for everyone stops speaking the language of the others.

217

In connection with certain parties, Duverger speaks of a “second power,“ an obscure power that sometimes consists of influential men on a paper whose distribution assures the party’s strength. This fact needs to be generalized: In modern parties, the second power is likely to consist of the corps of propagandists. (The same holds true for the State itself.) The propaganda instruments tend to assume a preponderant position, not without occasional serious conflicts, for the are at one and the same time the hub of the entire party and its raison d’être.

221

The party’s fundamental role is to make propaganda for the government.

Ultimately every party is a propaganda machine.

It is an organ designed to tame and train public opinion.

226

Like the political parties, the unions have felt the need to make propaganda.

227

Whether one wants it or not, this is the basic objective of propaganda. This mobilised public opinion will then translate the propaganda effect in one of two ways.

230

If the church accepts it, two important consequences follow. First of all, Christianity disseminated by such means is not Christianity. We have already seen the fact of propaganda on ideology. In fact, what happens as soon as the church avails itself of propaganda is a reduction of Christianity to the level of all other ideologies or secular religions.

231

Propaganda is one of the most powerful factors of de-Christianization in the world.

232

Democracy depends on public opinion and competition between political parties. In order to come to power, parties make propaganda to gain voters.

233

For it is evident that a conflict exists between the principles of democracy - particularly its concept of the individual - and the processes of propaganda.

234

The conviction of the invincible force of truth is tied to the notion of progress and is a part of this ideology. Democracies have been fed on the notion that truth may be hidden for a while but will triumph in the end, that truth in itself carries an explosive force, a power of fermentation that will necessarily lead to the end of lies and the shining apparition of the true. This truth was the implicit core of the democratic doctrine. One must stress furthermore, that this was in itself a truth of an ideological kind that ended by making history because it imposed itself on history. This attitude contained the seeds of, but was at the same time (and still is) the exact opposite of, the current Marxist attitude that history is truth. Proof through history is nowadays regarded as the proof. He in whose favor history decides, was right. But what is “to be right” when one speaks of history? It is to win, to survive, i.e., to be the strongest. This would mean that the strongest and most efficien, nowadays, is the possessor of the truth. Truth thus has no content of its own but exists only as history produces it; truth receives reality through history.
	One can easily see the relationship between the two attitudes and how one can pass easily from one to the other: for if truth possesses an invincible power that makes it triumph through itself alone, it becomes logical - by a simple but dangerous step - that triumph is truth.

234 - 235

History shows that plain truth can be so thoroughly snuffed out that it disappears, and that in certain periods the lie is all-powerful.

235

The conviction of democracy and its claim to inform people collide with the fact that propaganda follows an entirely different mechanism, performs a function entirely different from that of information, and that nowadays facts do not assume reality in the people’s eyes unless they are established by propaganda.

For modern man, propaganda is really creating truth. This means that truth is powerless without propaganda. And in view of the challenge the democracies face, it is of supreme importance that they abandon their confidence in truth as such and assimilate themselves to the methods of propaganda. Unless they do so, considering the present tendencies of civilisation, the democratic nations will lose the war conducted in this area.

236

It is argued that the first condition would be met by the absence of a monopoly (in a democracy) of the means of propaganda, and by the free interplay of various propagandas. True, compared with the State monopoly and the unity of propaganda in totalitarian States, one finds a great diversity of press and radio in democratic countries. But this fact must not be stressed too much: although there is no State of legal monopoly, there is nevertheless, indeed a private monopoly.

236 - 237

In the United States, most radio and motion pictures corporations are very large. The others are secondary and unable to compete, and centralization still goes on. The trend everywhere is in the direction of a very few, very powerful companies controlling all the propaganda media. Are the still private? In any event, as we have already seen, the State must make its propaganda, if only under the aspect of disseminating news.

237

“Freedom of expression is democracy; to prevent propaganda is to violate democracy.” Certainly, but it must be remembered that the freedom of expression of one or two powerful companies that do not express the thoughts of the individual or small groups, but of capitalist interests or an entire public, does not exactly correspond to what was called freedom of expression a century ago. One must remember, further, that the freedom of expression of one who makes a speech to a limited audience is not the same as that of the speaker who has all the radio sets in the country at his disposal, all the more as the science of propaganda gives to these instruments a shock effect that the non-initiated cannot equal.

238

Freedom to express ideas is no longer at stake in this debate … What we have is mastery and domination by the State of by some powerful groups over the whole of the technical media or opinion formation … the individual has no access to them … he is no longer a participant in this battle for the free expression of ideas: he is the stake. What matters for him is which voice he will be permitted to hear and which words will have the power to obsess him.

What characterizes democracy is that it permits the expression of different propagandas.

Purely personal opinions and, even more, certain political tendencies are necessarily excluded. “No freedom for the enemies of freedom“ is the watchword then.

239

The formula with which Americans explain their attitude is: “The truth pays.“ That is, propaganda based on truth is more effective than any other. Besides, Hitler’s famous statement on the lie is not a typical trait of propaganda. There is an unmistakable evolution here: lies and falsifications are used less and less.

240

The ultimate aim of all propaganda: that of provoking action without prior thoght.

241

We can say the same when there is a diversity of propagandas: when various propagandas are permitted to express themselves they become ineffective with respect to their immediate objective.

243

To put it differently: mythical democratic propaganda in no way prepares its listeners for democracy, but strengthens their totalitarian tendencies, providing at best a different direction for those tendencies.

Propaganda appeals to belief: it rebuilds the drive toward the lost paradise.

246

Even authoritarian governments are aware that in propaganda the truth pays.

250

The growth of information inevitably leads to the need for propaganda. This is truer in a democratic system than in any other.

250 - 251

The public will accept news if it is arranged in a comprehensible system, and if it does not speak only to the intelligence but to the “heart.” This means, precisely, that the public wants propaganda, and if the State does not wash to leave it to a party, which will then provide explanations for everything (i.e., the truth), it must itself make propaganda. Thus the democratic State, even if it does not want to, becomes a propagandist State because of the need to dispense information. This entails a profound constitutional and ideological transformation. It is, in effect, a State that must proclaim an official, general and explicit truth. The State can then no longer be objective, or liberal, but is forced to bring to the over informed people a corpus intelligentiae.

251

This would not be necessary if the citizens were to work only three or four hours a day and devote four hours daily to personal reflect and cultural pursuits, if all citizens had a similar cultural level, if the society were in a state of equilibrium and not under the shadow of tomorrow’s menace, and if the moral education of the citizens enabled them to master their passions and their egotism. But as these four conditions are not fulfilled, and as the volume of information grows very rapidly, we are forced to seek explanations his et nunc, and publicly parade them in accordance with popular demand.

The content of this religion is of little importance; what matters is to satisfy the religious feelings of the masses; these feelings are used to integrate the masses into the national collective. We must not delude ourselves: when one speaks to us of “massive democracy“ and “democracy participation,“ these are only veiled terms that mean “religion.”

256

Such contradiction is in no way felt by the individual for whom democracy has become a myth and a set of democratic imperatives, merely stimuli that activate conditioned reflexes. The word democracy, having become a simple incitation, no longer has anything to do with democratic behaviour. And the citizen can repeat indefinitely “the sacred formulas of democracy“ while acting like a storm trooper.

264

We cannot name every factor working upon an individual. It would be wrong even to attempt this, for propaganda is not an isolated phenomenon with clearly delineated boundaries; it is completely integrated and immersed in a social entity. It is related to the general sociological structure, and to try to dissociate it and reduce it to tits true state would be to strip it of its true nature.

266

The  normal conditions under which propaganda works are in no way reproduced. Such propaganda takes place in no sociological context. Then, there is no crowd effect, no psychological tension, no interaction of individuals caught in a mass and exciting each other - the experiment is shared by only a few, in a laboratory atmosphere. These conditions are the very opposite of propaganda.

275

The mathematical methods (statistics, etc.) can be applied only within very narrow limits, and to problems that generally have had to be taken out of context.

The desire to reduce a situation to precise figures presumes a threefold prior operation:
	a. The removal of the fact to be quantified from its psychological, religious, sentimental, historic contexts and its removal from the individual’s Weltanschauung as a whole.
	b. The reduction of the phenomenon to its simplest state, by elimination of all complexities and subsidiary aspects - which may actually be the most important.
	c. Consideration of the external phenomena only, though they may be merely extensions of more important, different factors. But quantification must restrict itself to external aspects, behavior, visible attitudes, and so on.

275 - 276

Socio-psychologists, who use such mathematical methods, are quick to claim that what cannot be reached by their methods does not exist.

276

The psychologists and sociologists who have held that propaganda had little effect all share certain views based on the choice of values.

278

On the other hand, the non-relation between opinion and action needs to be considered here once again. For example, in a recent struggle over public schools, I found the following: Some of my friends mouthed the stereotypes of supports for public schools - unity of youth, independence of the faculty, intellectual quality, and so on. They expressed their views very clearly - but sent their own children to private schools.

279

The propagandist must follow the current of public opinion.

280

Private opinion, which he keeps carefully to himself or expresses only to a very small number of persons, and his “public” opinion, which he shares with his group.

By doing so, it can “make an individual take an action completely different from the action that would be sparked by his private opinion.“

Does anyone believe that pre-established attitudes will resist a real propaganda that surrounds the individual without pause from morning to night, from childhood to old age.

280 - 281

Under such conditions, pre-existing attitudes will fade quickly. They cannot resist the psychological bombardment of a real propaganda campaign.

281

All that needs to be preserved of this theory is that propaganda must always use existing tendencies, as I have already said.

282

Let us add that, in any case, he who fails to make propaganda will be defeated immediately. This at least shows that propaganda is needed.

Let us return the example of the American public’s not being interested in civic programs on the radio.

286

The failure of propaganda must also be attributed to the complete absence of both a usable ideology and subjects that could cause excitement or enthusiasm.

287

This explains why many American socio-psychologists deny the effectiveness of propaganda, but admit that of Public Relations and Human Relations: for these are precisely the form propaganda takes in the United States.

288

A distinction must be made between those who vote Socialist and those - whose number is far greater - who are so imbued with Socialism that they no longer even recognise as Socialist what were considered to be purely Socialist demands fifty years ago.

290

The fact that it is utilised in so many different fields shows that our society is in the process of booming a total society, e.g., a society in which no single act can be a matter of indifference; every act and feeling assumes a political character; no act is purely personal.

291

The individual would be reached by propaganda only the extent that he participates in public opinion (or to the extent that he is “massified”)

298

Obviously, in the former case, the injection of propaganda from the outside is easy, but on the other hand, it may be more readily felt as propaganda (because the domestic governmental propaganda is less evident, less well recognized) and is therefore mistrusted; on the other hand, it responds much less to a need. In a totalitarian country, most people, before they are fully integrated, want to hear what is forbidden, the other line, which, incidentally, is the only support foreign propaganda has. But in a democracy, this need is much less felt, so that even though the reasons are less obvious, it is as difficult to conduct external propaganda against a democracy as against a dictatorship.

299

The propagandist’s work will be different in this case: a weak incitation to begin with, reinforced by a second argument, and excluding a plurality of responses when he speaks to a cultured milieu; but a violent incitation, without secondary argumentation, in the face of an uncultured public.

300

Pre-propaganda and auxiliary responses

Propaganda is a form of communication demanding the learning of new responses.

302

The propagandist seeks more certain and automatic responses.
To begin with, he will give up anticipating how the individual will react. He will think of the group and be satisfied with a generally favorable result - for example, with 80 percent of the responses obtained. On the other hand, he will also make less of an effort to elicit a specific response toward a localized action than to obtain a general attitude that, in turn, will create local responses.
Therefore, the propagandist’s effect will aim at the elimination of individualizing factors. The expected response must be less and less conditioned by natural elements (milieu, education, and so on) and more and more by the “pre-education” provided in depth by propaganda. At the moment when the attitudes learned by propaganda begin to prevail over the “natural” attitudes that are man’s second nature, they become collective, and the propagandist who has taught them can then calculate more easily what a given stimulus will elicit from them.

304

By “organization” is meant that every individual must be put into a network comprising many organizations that surround him on all sides and control him on all levels. But the aim is not to stifle the individual through organization; it is to make him an active member of that organization.

Meetings, marches, banners, and posters, were used for the dissemination of these slogans.